good afternoon
i want to begin by answering the big
question that people have been asking
in the last 48 hours and that is
is this government asking you the people
the public to do one thing while senior
people here in
government do something else have we
been asking you to make sacrifices to
obey
social distancing stay at home while
some people have been basically flouting
those rules
and endangering lives and it's because
i take this matter so seriously and
frankly it is
so serious that i can tell you today
i've had extensive face-to-face
conversations
with dominic cummings and i've concluded
that in traveling to find the right kind
of child care
at the moment when both he and his wife
were about to be incapacitated
by coronavirus and when he had no
alternative
i think he followed the instincts of
every father
and every parent and i do not
mark him down for that and though there
have been many other allegations about
what happened when he was in
self-isolation and thereafter some of
them
palpably false i believe
that in every respect he has acted
responsibly
and legally and with integrity
and with the overwhelming aim of
stopping the spread of the virus
and saving lives and i stress this
fundamental name
because it's thanks to this country's
collective resolve in achieving that aim
that we continue
to make progress so let me give you
today's figures 3 million
458 905 tests
for coronavirus have now been carried
out in the uk
including 110 401 tests
carried out yesterday
259 559
people have tested positive and that's
an increase of 2409 cases
since yesterday smaller increase
than we were seeing over the last few
weeks
8951 people are in hospital
with covid19 in the uk down 11 percent
from 10 085 this time
last week and sadly of those tested
positive for coronavirus
across all settings 36 793
have now died that's an increase
of 118 fatalities since yesterday and
each of those fatalities represents a
family in mourning
the grief of friends and
relatives and as we mourn them we
resolve
again to beat this virus and get
our country back on its feet and we can
and we will two weeks ago i set out the
government's roadmap
to begin easing the measures we put in
place to control the spread
of coronavirus i said that we would do
so
in a safe and controlled way
based on our assessment of progress
against the five tests we set
for adjusting the lockdown we're going
to set out that assessment
in detail in the coming days
but today i can confirm that i do
believe
we will be in a position to move to step
two of our plan
as part of step two we set out plans for
a phased
re-opening of schools because the
education
of our children is crucial for their
welfare
their health for their long-term future
and for social justice and so
in line with the approach being taken in
many other countries
we want to start getting our children
back into the classroom
in a way that is as manageable and as
safe
as possible so we said
we would begin with early years settings
and reception year one and year six
in primary schools early years reception
year one
and year six and today
i can announce that it is our intention
to go ahead with that
as planned on june the first
a week on monday
we then intend from june the 15th for
secondary schools to provide
some contact for year 10 and year 12
students
to help them prepare for exams next year
with up to a quarter of these students
in at any point and by opening
schools to more pupils in this limited
way
we're taking a deliberately cautious
approach and this comes after a
constructive period of
consultation with schools teachers and
unions
led by the education secretary gavin
williamson i want to thank all
the teachers education child care staff
who have stepped up to the challenge and
kept schools open throughout
this crisis the department for education
will engage with teaching unions local
authorities
and school leaders in the coming days
giving them an opportunity to ask
questions and probe the evidence
behind our plans and the final decision
will be taken as part of the formal
review
into lockdown measures which the law
requires us to undertake
by thursday we will of course
continue to consider all the evidence
as we said we would do and we will
continue to work
hard with those bodies over the course
of the coming week
but i think it is important for us to be
clear
about the government's intentions now
so that teachers and parents can plan in
earnest for schools
to reopen a week on monday now
i acknowledge that a june the first
opening may not be possible
for all schools but the government will
continue to support and work with the
sector
to ensure that any schools experiencing
difficulties
are able to open more widely as soon as
possible
detailed guidance has been published by
the department for education
on how schools can open in a way that is
safe
for children teachers and parents
while of course we recognize that full
social distancing may
not be possible especially when teaching
young children
our guidance sets out a range of
protective
measures to keep children and staff
safe this includes reducing the size of
classes
and keeping children in small groups
without mixing with others
staggered break and lunch times
as well as drop offs and pick ups
increasing the frequency of cleaning
reducing the use of shared items
and utilizing outdoor space
all children and staff and their
families will have access
to testing if they display symptoms and
this will enables
children and staff to get back to school
if they test
negative and if they test positive
we will take the appropriate reactive
measures
we will continue to work with the sector
to support them to prepare for wider
wider
opening and ensure all children and
young people can continue to receive
the best care education and training
possible we will set out
what moving to step two means for other
areas
such as non-essential retail and more
social contacts
over the course of the next week so
let me stress again in conclusion
we are making good progress
but that progress is conditional
provisional we must keep reducing
the incidence of this disease we must
keep that
r down below one and that means we must
all remember the basics wash our hands
keep social distance
isolate if you have symptoms get a test
we are beating this thing
but we will beat it all the faster if we
stay alert control the virus
and save lives i now turn to steve
powers national medical director
of nhs england to present today's data
steve thank you prime minister and good
afternoon everybody
if i could go through today's data
slides with which i'm sure
you are all familiar so as ever the
first data slide
is in respect to the effect of social
distancing
on our transport usage within the
country
and you can see as we have shown you
before
that when it comes to vehicles cars
light goods and heavy goods vehicles has
been a gradual
increase following an early decline but
in public transport in national rail
transport for london
and non-tfl bus routes you can see that
there's been a dramatic decline
and that that reduction in travel has
been maintained
over the period of the social distancing
measures
on the next slide we take a look at the
testing program
and the new positive cases of kovid 19
that are arising from that programme
and firstly you will see that in the
upper graph
there has been a large increase in
testing and indeed in testing capacity
in recent weeks you will see in the
bottom graph that we continue to see new
confirmed
test positive cases but even with an
increase
in the testing program they have
maintained steady
or indeed have started to drop which
reflects
that we are seeing less virus less
transmission of this virus
in the community and therefore lower
rates of infection
and then the next slide shows that how
that data then translates into our
hospitals
and clearly for the vast majority of
people this
is a mild illness if you catch the virus
but unfortunately for some symptoms and
complications do require hospitalization
and you can see
uh the data here on the new daily
admissions
uh into england uh with uh kovid 19 you
can see that that
peaked in april but has now been
steadily uh
declining uh in recent weeks again
reflecting
lower transmission rates uh in the
community
and then for our unfortunately sickest
patients who require some time
in our critical care facilities our
intensive treatment units
and unfortunately need mechanical
ventilation
to support their breathing then you can
see in the lower graph
that there has been another fall since
april
in all parts of the country in the
percentage of those beds and intensive
care units that are occupied
by kovid 19 patients again representing
the reduction of cases in the community
and therefore
less critically ill people coming to our
communities
and then on the next slide we can see
uh general data on the number of people
in hospital with covid19
and you can see that compared to last
week there has been a fall from
1085 to 8951
so a continued fall uh in the number of
hospital beds
uh that are occupied uh with patients
with covid19
and again in the graphs that you can see
that there is some variation around the
country
uh as uh to this uh london
as i've said before had the uh
biggest peak uh and the fastest
reduction but you can see
in other parts of the country that they
again
are coming off a plateau of numbers of
people in hospital
and there is overall a sustained decline
and then finally and unfortunately we go
to our slide
on the number of debts in the uk
and again you will be familiar with this
uh as i've said before
the daily count does vary from day to
day and particularly at weekends where
we have
a reporting lag and especially bank
holidays where
it might be three days rather than two
but the important
aspect of this particular graph is a
seven day rolling average
which takes out that day-to-day
variability and you can see that once
again
we are seeing a steady but sustained
decline in the number of deaths
again reflecting success in reducing
the transmission of virus in the
community
thank you thanks very much steve we're
going to go for some questions
first from the public and then from uh
from the media first we go to penny
in hampshire as this is a global
pandemic
how is the government working with other
countries to find solutions to vaccines
tracing gaps etc
rather than everyone working on their
own solutions
well thanks i'll ask steve to comment on
that as well but penny thank you very
much for that question because
i do think one of the most depressing
things about the way the the epidemic
ripped through the world was that it
it was a kind of a devil take the
hindmost approach amongst
so many countries that uh scrabbled to
get their own
share of very scarce resources such as
uh ppe
personal protective equipment or uh or
enzymes for
for testing and a real fight took place
across the world as we tried to
to protect our own uh populations and
you could see that
this was something that was a global
problem uh penny as you rightly say
a global pandemic a pandemic that
produced a national everywhere a
national
response and we in this government want
to see
a much more international approach we
want to see the nations of the earth
coming together
to produce the long-term solutions
particularly in
vaccines and that's why on june the 4th
that the uk is holding a big summit and
we've got huge numbers of
countries uh participating uh that are
going to
pledge uh very very considerable sums we
hope
into into finding a vaccine uh
people different people have different
levels of optimism about whether
jenny will get her a vaccine this year
next year
but i'm hearing more and more signs of
confidence about
our ability to do it and i certainly
think
that we'll do it all the faster if we
collaborate
across countries and across uh
scientific
communities so the uk is definitely uh
leading
in in that effort um steve yes
so so thank you penny so of course
science is a global endeavor
uh and i think it's been really
heartening how scientists across the
world
have rapidly come together and rapidly
advanced the pace of
not only our scientific understanding of
this completely new virus
but also in terms of working through the
biology
and then through to the sorts of
treatments and therapeutics that might
be used not not just for vaccines as the
prime minister said
but also in terms of using drugs some of
which are drugs that we
use in other contexts and rapidly
working
through clinical trials some of which
are international some of which are in
individual countries
to try and determine which drug or which
combination of drugs
might be capable of treating
uh and modifying the effects of this
virus infection
so as i've said before i think it's
remarkable how quickly
uh science has progressed but there are
still challenges ahead
and we don't underestimate uh the amount
of new science that we need to learn and
the challenges in
such as vaccine development but i can be
confident that that will be a global
effort and of course the uk is very
strong in life sciences
we have a long history of science and
particularly biological science
very strong universities and they will
be contributing to the global effort
thanks uh very much penny thank you
thanks steve can we go to
kate from woking
sorry i've got to read that i'm sorry
forgive me kate from kate from working
as our school has decided it's not
possible
to accommodate children of critical
workers alongside reception year one
and year six will the government
teachers unions and head teachers work
together
to find a plan that will provide for all
children
at home or in school in september
um kate look i totally understand that
the difficulties
that uh that your school faces this is
going to be
uh tough and i you know again i repeat
my thanks to
all uh teachers and educational staff
who actually worked very hard to keep
schools going for uh vulnerable children
and the children of key workers
uh throughout the last uh ten weeks um
what we will do uh is make sure that we
we stagger things and we and we pace
things and we work
directly with with you with local
authorities uh to make sure
that there is a a plan and you've heard
some of the measures that i
i outlined uh today i think
the the really important thing uh to
ensure that we get
everybody back and this whole thing up
and running
by september at the very latest is just
to keep
pushing down the incidence of that
disease to keep pushing that r down
that's going to be the most
effective way to ensure that not just
our schools but all
uh our economy is ready uh to go back
as fast as possible um stephen
the only thing i would add kate is just
on behalf of all my colleagues the staff
in the nhs who've worked so
magnificently through this
surge in the virus how grateful
everybody is to our colleagues
in schools to school teachers and and
those that work in schools for keeping
the children of our staff safe at school
and to continue
schooling uh during during the last few
months uh everybody's very grateful
it's been it's been absolutely critical
so thank you could we go to
uh the media now please ian watson from
bbc
here
i think you need to unmute ian
can we get ian's can we get ian's audio
i can kind of lip read but i think we're
gonna need to
i'm so sorry i'm so sorry ian can we
come back to you
i think we'll go to uh to robert peston
of itv we'll come back to you i promise
if we sort out your audio we'll come
back you got it
hello robert disaster hello
hello prime minister uh hello uh
professor paris good to see you both
um the simple
agreed facts in this case are
that uh that some excuse me
uh dominic cummings in a prima facie
sense breached
three hello can you not hear me no we
can hear you well keep going
oh sorry that's all technology's working
so well as i say the
the agreed facts are really simple uh
dominic cummings your aide in a private
facility sense breach three of the
lockdown
rules uh he left the house when somebody
was living with
uh had coronavirus symptoms
uh he was in a confined space with that
person in this case a car for several
hours and he went to a second home i
just want to be clear prime minister in
saying
that he behaved honorably did the right
thing uh by
you know trying to put in place
childcare arrangements are you saying
that if somebody is in the same position
as dominic cummings and has the same
child care concerns
they are completely at liberty to do
precisely what he did yes
no not sure and secondly um
retail businesses need a bit of time
shops need a bit of time to prepare to
open are they opening on june the 1st
thanks very much um robert and first of
all i really just want to repeat what i
i said earlier on looking at the very
severe child care difficulties that
presented themselves to
dominic cummings and his family i think
that what they did was
totally understandable there's actually
guidance about that particular
difficulty about uh what you need to do
about the pressures that families
face when they have child care needs he
found those needs where
they could best be best be served best
be
delivered and yes that did involve
travel but i have to say i think that
looking at
the situation i think any father any
parent
would frankly understand uh what he did
and i certainly do and i i spent a long
time
uh talking uh to him uh about it today
and on your
your point about uh the future and
uh and june the first well i can say
robert is is watch this space you will
have heard me
uh say what i've said we remain uh
firmly on that
road map but we are proceeding in a
way that is provisional that is
contingent uh that is
uh entirely dependent on our ability to
continue
to make the progress we are currently
making in pushing that aardon
uh defeating uh the virus and you'll be
hearing more about that
in the next few days
is ian back i think ian notebook sorry
thank you we'll go to
we'll come to ian as soon as we can
we'll go to uh gary gibbon of channel 4
please
thank you prime minister uh i i'm a bit
puzzled um
you've had this long chat with dominic
cummings you said he he went where he
could get child care i thought he he's
now saying
he didn't receive any child care but did
all the child care
himself uh you say he drove up the road
when he was about to be
incapacitated he didn't know that he
couldn't he couldn't know that
could he and you say more alarmingly
really you say he was following
instincts the rest of the country was
following rules
not instincts are we are now all
entitled to follow instincts
where will that leave it when a tracer
goes around to someone and says
you have coded i need you to isolate
well as
gary as i've said just now the guidance
makes it very clear that
uh where you have particular uh child
care needs that has got to be
that has got to be taken into account
and as i've said i've looked very clear
i've seen a lot of stuff in the last few
days about
this episode of self-isolation by uh mr
cummings
uh that does not seem to correspond
remotely uh with reality
and uh as as far as i can see
he stuck to the rules and he uh he acted
legally
and responsibly and with the with the
soul
and the soul objective of avoiding such
contact
as would uh spread the virus
he he got the virus probably in the
train in the car didn't he his objective
was to stop the spread
of the virus and and he behaved in a way
uh in such a way as to do that
can we have uh charlie cooper
no we're gonna go back sorry thanks gary
uh we're gonna go back to ian watson of
the bbc
yeah okay prime minister can you hear me
now
i can yes excellent so for better watch
i haven't entirely been silenced
um forgive me conservative mps have
gotten in touch with us uh today prime
minister because they say lots of their
constituents are
angry they feel that allowing somebody
who was already ill
to travel 250 miles across the country
breaches at least the spirit of your
guidance hand on heart
can you really say that this didn't
breach the spirit of your guidance
when were you told that dominic cummings
was making this trip
and did you approve that trip and can i
also ask another question just in case
i get muted again and that is this you
said that some of the stories in the
press were palpably
untrue can you clear up one story which
your ministers
and indeed your press officers haven't
been able to clear up did dominic
cummings make a trip
to barnard castle in april
when he was isolating or at least was
based in durham
right well ian what i can
tell you is that i think when you look
at the guidance when you look at the
particular child care needs that mr
cummings faced at the time it was
reasonable of him
uh to self-isolate as he did for
14 days or or more uh
with his family uh where he did and
i i think that was a sensible and
defensible
and i understand it and as for
all the other allegations you know again
i just repeat what i've said
earlier on um i've looked at them
carefully and
i'm content that at all times throughout
his period in isolation actually on both
sides
of that period he behaved responsibly
and
correctly and with the name with a view
to
defeating the virus and stopping the
spread but some conservative mps are
saying prime minister
that this defends that dominick cummings
behaved responsibly many of their
constituents are angry about it yes well
let me just say
they were irresponsible in not reaching
the guidelines and going somewhere
closely
during this lockdown and they feel
insulted by that so what would you like
to say to
their constituents because they're
that's where the post ban is coming in
of course i understand that i understand
that kind i understand that and i think
that
one of the reasons it's so important and
one of the reasons i was so determined
to
uh to come and talk to everybody about
this is because i can totally
get why people might feel
uh so confused and uh as you say
uh so offended by the idea that it was
one thing for uh for people here
and another thing for for others but
really having looked at what
uh what happened having looked at uh his
intentions and what he was trying to do
for the good of his uh his family i
really think most people
uh will understand what he was doing and
it went over
above all uh what he did if you look at
the
the measures that he took they were
designed to stop
the spread of the virus and i think
that he at all times as i say behaved
responsibly
and legally though ian and i perfectly
accept the point that you uh that you
make and that's why it's so important
that's why i wanted to come out and and
make these points
uh this afternoon can we go now to
to charlie cooper of politico
thank you for having me um thank you
prime minister
you say that mr cummings had no
alternative
but what is your definition of no
alternative in this context and it's a
really important question because
there's a question of the ongoing advice
to the public here
is it now government advice that if you
have symptoms
but are concerned about child care have
no alternative in your words
you don't necessarily have to stay at
home but you can travel
to another home maybe a nicer part of
the country if you're lucky enough to
have access to one
is that a new advice the advice remains
unchanged
charlie and that is that if you
have symptoms then you should
self-isolate for 14 days
and that's what mr cummings and his
family did
uh scott mcnabb from the scotsman mr
cummings actions
if the advice remains unchanged can you
explain how mr cummings actions are not
in breach of the advice
sorry can we go because the advice makes
it absolutely clear
that if you have particular child care
issues and
that is a factor that has to be uh taken
into account
and when i look at what actually
happened
uh dominic cummings and uh and his
family self-isolated for 14 days
and that is what you've got to do
and uh there was a as i said at the
outset there was a risk
that they would not have if they both
went under in such a way as to be unable
to care for their child to get to
to your point then they might have
needed uh the help of
uh of relatives who were living nearby
who could come
in a socially distanced way as it
happened that was not necessary for
for for medical reasons i don't want to
to go into but that was the
the risk and i think it was a real risk
and i think
it was absolutely responsible of dominic
cummings to
uh to see the risk to his family and to
see the risk to his
to his child and to take steps to avert
it and that's what he did
so and that in no way changes uh the
guidance or
or the advice can we go to
uh to scott mcnabb from the scotsman
please
yeah um thank you prime minister in
scotland
our former chief medical officer
resigned after a
late night conversation with nicola
sturgeon when it emerged
she had reached lockdown rules traveled
to a second residence
in another part of the country the
reason she had to go we were later told
was
because keeping her on risked
undermining the public health campaign
to keep
the virus under control is there not a
real danger that if
mr cummings remains in place people may
choose to disregard these
lockdown restrictions and so undermine
the progress we've made so far in
suppressing the virus
no because the sharp distinction is that
uh unlike
um the the the lady you mentioned uh mr
cummings actually went into
uh into uh lockdown uh because he had
symptoms went into
uh self-isolation for 14 days
or more and that is what that is what
you should do in the particular
circumstances of his
isolation as i've said now uh several
times were determined
uh by the child care needs of of the
family
um erin lyons from the oxford mail
good afternoon prime minister professor
powers
this week we reported on the death of
peter gough an administration assistant
to oxford's genre cliff hospital
who died from coronavirus after raising
concerns he didn't have access to ppe or
any
hand sanitizer even after the death of
two porters at the same hospital
the managing truster said it followed
national guidance
and no staff members who don't have
direct contact
with patients need ppa but the family
and friends believe you died
unnecessarily and should have been
better protected at work
to professor powers what is the evidence
and rationale behind limiting ppe in
this way in hospitals
is it entirely science-based or is it
down to limited resources
and to the prime minister an oxford
doctor who works in intensive care in
the city
had coronavirus in march had a
four-month-old baby at home
but he said he followed the guidance
which he saw is incredibly clear
and stayed in lockdown throughout if the
government guidance included the
exemption
that mr cummings used why did so many
people
in oxford jumb beyond seem completely
unaware of
it and a great cost for themselves and
their loved ones
shall i take the couple so on on ppe
guidance the answer is yes
ppe guidance is uh based on the science
uh the ppe guidance in the uk is
developed by
our experts at public health england
public health scotland and the
other devolved administrations and it
closely follows world health
organization guidance
as well that guidance has been
refreshed a couple of times since we
learned about this virus
in january the last time it was
reviewed was now about a month ago it
was weekend after easter
and that was done with a huge amount of
input from professional colleagues
across the healthcare sector including
the royal colleges
some of the unions and others and there
was a real consensus
around the work on that i think public
health england had over a thousand
comments over the course of refreshing
that
so i'm confident that the guidance that
is in place at the moment which is that
guidance
is not only based on the science but on
the professional
input and support uh of many many
professional groups uh within within
uh healthcare thanks very much steve
well uh erin i i
obviously just on on pp if i could if i
could say something
because uh it is it has been one of the
most difficult and
uh the most uh intractable and uh
in some ways infuriating aspects of the
of the crisis the
the difficulty of delivering ppe in a
timely manner not just to the nhs by the
way but to care homes and across the
whole
uh across the whole of the country uh i
think we're now
doing much much better than we were uh
a month six weeks uh six weeks ago uh
and
uh as far as i know uh
no hospitals currently have uh have
stock outs in in the way that uh
that you describe but i will look at i
will look at what's happening in the in
the radcliffe
um and and i will try to make sure that
uh they get what they need and
thank you for for for raising that but
but on
on the other issue um you know of of mr
cummings and his
uh i just and the doctor you mentioned
in oxford i just
repeat my point i think they're in the
same position uh
mr cummings did isolate uh for 14 days
or
or more um and uh the circumstances of
his
uh isolation his self-isolation uh were
determined
by the the difficult uh child care
position that he found himself
in and i understand that and
i think that many other people and many
other people do um
thank you very much everybody for uh
tuning in
uh this evening thank you for uh for
watching i think we'll be back
again uh tomorrow thank you
so the prime minister
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc.co.uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news